Tenali rama
Tenali raman 
Krishna Deva Raya’s greedy minister, Chatur Pandit, arrives at the court with a red peacock.

Krishna Deva Raya: I have never seen such a creature!

Courtiers: We agree!

Chatur Pandit: Please accept this gift, Your Majesty! My servants searched the jungles of Madhya Pradesh to find this creature.

Tenali Raman (thinks): How can a bird so bright survive in the jungle? Other animals will easily be able to see it and kill it.

Krishan Deva Raya: Thank you, Chatur Pandit! How can we reward you?

Chatur Pandit: Your Majesty, a 100 gold coins will be enough, as I spent that to get the bird.

Tenali Raman: Your Majesty, I think we should observe this peacock for a while before we give Chatur Pandit his reward. I will go to Madhya Pradesh to get more birds like these.

Krishna Deva Raya: Alright, Tenali. You have 2 weeks.

Tenali Raman did not go to Madhya Pradesh.

Tenali (to his spies): Look for the person who has painted that peacock red.

Spies: Yes, sir!

The spies found the painter.

Tenali (to the painter): Don’t worry, I won’t punish you. Just paint another 10 peacocks the same colour.

Painter: Ji, huzoor.

Tenali Raman takes the peacocks to the court, two weeks later.

Krishna Deva Raya: Bravo, Tenali. Treasurer, give him a 1000 gold coins.

Tenali Raman: That is not what they cost, Your Majesty.

Krishna Deva Raya: What is your price then, Tenali Raman?

Tenali Raman: A bucket of water, a bag of red paint, and a gold coin for this artist.

Krishna Deva Raya (angrily): Chatur Pandit, I sentence you to…

Tenali Raman: Your Majesty, your desire for fame led you to believe a red peacock could exist. For a long time, there has been needless spending on such curiosities.

Tenali Raman: It is better that your subjects be prosperous, rather than a display of wealth. I request you to let Chatur Pandit go and reward the artist for highlighting this matter.

Krishna Deva Raya: You’re right, Tenali.

Chatur Pandit (falls at the king’s feet): Your Majesty, please forgive me.

Krishna Deva Raya: I will do so, but you are banished from the court for a month. And you must return the gifts you got earlier.

The monsoon arrived and the peacocks danced. The rain washed off their red colour.

Krishna Deva Raya (laughs): Look, Tenali!

Tenali smiles.

The people of the kingdom danced in the rain.

The people (to each other): We are lucky to have a king who is not afraid to admit his mistake.

Chatur Pandit walked home alone in the rain.

 

 Sent By : http://goo.gl/IpBSAH
Tenali 
When Krishna Deva Raya used to rule in Vijaynagar, Babur ruled Delhi. Babur wanted to meet Tenali Raman asa he had heard a great deal about Tenali’s quick wit.

Babur’s messenger arrived in Krishna Deva Raya’s court one day. He said, “Greetings, King Krishna Deva Raya. Emperor Babur wishes Tenali Raman would visit Delhi.”
Krishna Deva Raya replied, “So be it.”

Tenali Raman reached Delhi and settled in the guesthouse.
Meanwhile, Babur spoke with his courtiers in court. He had a plan. “No one will laugh at Tenali Raman’s jokes tomorrow! I want to see how he will make us laugh then.”
The courtiers chorused, “Yes, Your Majesty.”

The next day, Tenali Raman arrived in the court.
Tenali Raman started to narrate one of his jokes. “Once there was a …”
The courtiers cut him off by yawning profusely.

On the sixteenth day, Tenali Raman stopped going to the court.
Tenali Raman thought to himself, “Let me follow Babur to see where he goes everyday.” He wore such clothes that no one wold be able to see his face.

Babur and his minister would walk by the Yamuna every morning.
Babur said, while giving gold coins to beggars, “There you go! Make good use of them.”

Tenali Raman thought of a plan.

The next day, Tenali Raman disguised himself as an old man. He also had a spade and mango sapling.

Tenali Raman thought, “Let me wait for the king here.”
Seeing the king approach,, Tenali began planting the sapling.
Babar said, “You’re old, you won’t be alive when this tree bears fruit. Why are you planting it?”

Tenali Raman said, “Your Majesty, I tasted the fruits of trees my forefathers planted. Similarly, my grandchildren will enjoy the fruit of this tree.”
Babar exclaimed, “That is a noble thought!”

Wanting to reward the old man, Babar took a bag and and said, “Here, take this bag of gold coins.”
Tenali Raman replied, “Thank you, Your Majesty. You have given me the fruit of planting this sapling before it has grown.”

Babar, pleased with this answer too, said, “Well done, again. Take this second bag of gold coins.”
Tenali Raman said, “A tree gives fruit once a year, but I am getting the fruit of my labour twice, Your Majesty!”

Babar again appreciated this clever reply. He said, “Bravo! This third bag of gold coins is also yours.”
Babur’s minister whispered to him, “Your Majesty, at this rate you will give all your wealth to him. Let’s go.”

Babar, laughing, agreed.
Tenali Raman took off his fake beard and called out to them as they were going, “Your Majesty, please look at me.”

Babar was astounded at Tenali Raman’s intelligence. He said, “Tenali Raman, you are truly a great wit! Come back to court for more rewards.”

Tenali Raman went back to Babar’s court and entertained him for many days. Finally, he returned home.
Krishna Deva Raya said, “You have brought glory to the kingdom, Tenali!”
Tenali Raman flashed back, “Your Majesty, then I deserve a reward from you too!”

Krishna Deva Raya said, laughing, “Yes, indeed. Here are 10,000 gold coins.”
Tenali Raman replied, “Thank you, Your Majesty!

 

 Sent By : http://goo.gl/IpBSAH
The r
Once, an Arab horse trader came to Krishan Deva Raya’s court.

He said, “Your Majesty, see this Arab steed! It is my finest. If you like, I can get more.”

Krishna Deva Raya replied thoughtfully, “This is the only breed missing from my stable.”

The king saw the beautiful horses standing outside his palace.

Krishna Deva Raya said impulsively, “I will buy them all!”

The trader replied, “I need an advance of 5000 gold coins. I’ll bring them in two days.”

Two weeks passed.

Krishna Deva Raya thought to himself while walking in his garden, “Where is the trader?” He saw Tenali Raman sitting there, writing on a piece of paper.

Krishna Deva Raya asked, “What are you writing, Tenali Raman?”

Tenali Raman replied, “I’m listing the biggest fools in the land.”

Curious, Krishna Deva Raya said, “Let me have a look.” Tenali Raman handed him the paper.

Krishna Deva Raya was taken aback and angry. “How can my name be at the top of this list? I’m the king!”

Tenali Raman retorted, “Whoever gives a stranger 5000 gold coins and thinks that he will return is a fool, Your Majesty.”

Krishna Deva Raya asked, “What if he returns?”

Tenali Raman replied in an instant, “Then I will put his name at the top of the list instead of yours!”

Krishna Deva Raya said, “I understand what you’re saying, Tenali. I will always consult you now on important matters.”

 

 Sent By : http://goo.gl/IpBSAH
The h
Once, king Krishna Deva Raya wanted to expand his army. So, he needed more horses. He decided to give one horse to each person in his kingdom, to take care of. He also gave everyone a good supply of straw to feed the horses. Everyone except Tenali Rama was happy with this plan. He shut his horse in one room and everyday at exactly nine o’clock he gave the horse very little straw through the window. He gave the rest of the straw to his cows who became fat and healthy.

At the end of a year, the king wanted to see all the horses. All the people who had been given horses to grow up, brought their horses for inspection. But Tenali Rama did not bring his horse. On being questioned, he answered that his horse had become so strong that he could not bring it to the court. The king was surprised on hearing this. He said, “Alright, I will send my chief inspector to your house tomorrow morning at nine to inspect the horse there.” Tenali agreed.

The next morning, the chief inspector went to Tenali’s house. He had a long beard.

Tenali took him to the room where the horse was kept and asked him to look through the window. When the inspector peeped through the window, naturally his beard went in through the window first. Seeing the beard, the horse thought that it must be straw that was being given to him at the fixed time. It caught hold of the beard in his teeth and pulled. The inspector shouted in pain and tried to pull his beard back. But the horse knew that this was the only food he would get all day and pulled with all his might till the inspector lost his beard.

The inspector went running to the king. He reported that indeed Tenali Rama’s horse was the strongest of them all.

Here's another great story about Tenali Raman.

Once, king Krishna Deva Raya wanted to expand his army. So, he needed more horses. He decided to give one horse to each person in his kingdom, to take care of. He also gave everyone a good supply of straw to feed the horses. Everyone except Tenali Rama was happy with this plan. He shut his horse in one room and everyday at exactly nine o’clock he gave the horse very little straw through the window. He gave the rest of the straw to his cows who became fat and healthy.

At the end of a year, the king wanted to see all the horses. All the people who had been given horses to grow up, brought their horses for inspection. But Tenali Rama did not bring his horse. On being questioned, he answered that his horse had become so strong that he could not bring it to the court. The king was surprised on hearing this. He said, “Alright, I will send my chief inspector to your house tomorrow morning at nine to inspect the horse there.” Tenali agreed.

The next morning, the chief inspector went to Tenali’s house. He had a long beard.

Tenali took him to the room where the horse was kept and asked him to look through the window. When the inspector peeped through the window, naturally his beard went in through the window first. Seeing the beard, the horse thought that it must be straw that was being given to him at the fixed time. It caught hold of the beard in his teeth and pulled. The inspector shouted in pain and tried to pull his beard back. But the horse knew that this was the only food he would get all day and pulled with all his might till the inspector lost his beard.

The inspector went running to the king. He reported that indeed Tenali Rama’s horse was the strongest of them all.
 

 Sent By : http://goo.gl/IpBSAH
The a
One summer night, when Tenaliram and his wife were about to sleep, when he heard the sound of rustling of leaves coming from outside. There was not even the slightest breeze blowing at that time, so he presumed that there were some thieves hiding in the bushes. He understood that they must be planning to rob his house in the night.
He thought of a plan said loudly to his wife, “My dear, I have heard that some notorious thieves are on the loose in our neighborhood. So let’s hide all the jewellery and money that we have in the well.”

A little later, Tenaliram and his wife came out of the house carrying a big trunk, and dropped it into the well. Then they went back inside the house, and pretended to go off to sleep.
The thieves waited for a while and then started drawing water from the well. They hoped to empty the well and get the treasure. The thieves kept drawing out water the entire night. Towards daybreak, they managed to pull out the trunk, and when they opened it, they were extremely shocked and disappointed to see only some big stones in it. They understood that it was Tenaliram’s plan to outsmart them. Just then, Tenaliram came out of his house and said, “Thank you friends, for watering my plants. I must pay you for your labour.”

Hearing this, the thieves fell at Tenali’s feet for forgiveness. Tenali let them go when they promised not to steal or rob anyone ever again.
Moral- Keeping cool and using your wit in dire situations can help you get out of them.

 

 Sent By : http://goo.gl/IpBSAH
The king
The ruler of Vijaynagar, Krishnadeva Raya had a versatile minister at his durbar, Tenali Raman. He was a poet, jester and the personal adviser of the king. Raja Krishnadeva Raya was very fond of Tenali Raman as he could diffuse any tense situation with his ready wit and humour.

One day, Krishnadeva Raya saw a strange dream. He dreamt of a magnificent magical palace. It was made of dazzling stones and floated in the air. The palace had every comfort and amenity that one could ever wish for. It could be lit up with a thousand lights or made to disappear into the darkness in a jiffy.

The next day when the king woke up, he vividly remembered the dream. He summoned all his courtiers and told them about it. The courtiers sang praises of the king and his beautiful dream.

Then the king made a public announcement: “I will give a hundred thousand gold coins to the person who can build me the palace of my dream.”

Everyone was startled at the king’s announcement. They knew that it was not practically possible to build the palace that the king wanted. But no one had the courage to say so. Many of the king’s well-wishers told him that such a palace can only exist in one’s mind. But he refused to listen and threatened his courtiers with grave consequences if they did not find someone who could make his dream come true.

The courtiers got worried and approached Tenali Raman for help.

The senior minister requested Tenali Raman, “Dear Tenali, now only you can make our king understand that his wish to erect the palace of his dream is absurd or else all of us will get a severe punishment.” Tenali Raman assured them that he would try to help them.

A few days later, a very old man came to meet the king in his court. He was crying for justice.

Krishnadeva Raya asked, “What brings you here my good man? Tell me without fear and I assure you that justice will be done.” “I have been robbed , Your Majesty,” wailed the old man. “Someone has taken away all my savings and now I don’t have a single paisa left.”

“Who robbed you?” asked the king angrily. “Such a crime cannot go unpunished. You name him and I will have him hanged immediately!”

“Your Majesty! I will tell you but first assure me that on hearing upon his name, you will not get angry and punish me instead,” requested the old man.

“Yes, I promise,” replied the king impatiently.

“It is you, my lord,” said the old man in a trembling voice.

“How dare you say a ridiculous thing like that, I will…,” began the king, but then he remembered his promise and calmed down. He asked that the old man explain what he actually meant to say.

“Your Majesty! Last night, I dreamt that you came with your entourage of ministers and soldiers and looted my entire life’s savings, five thousand gold coins!” said the old man.

“Are you a fool or completely insane?” roared the king. “How can you treat your dream as a reality? Dreams are not true!”

“But they are, Your Majesty! If your dream of a palace hanging in air can come true, why can’t my dream come true?” retorted the old man.

And then, the man took off his beard and hair and stood before the king. It was none other than Tenali Rama!

He bowed before the king and said, “Your Majesty! This was the only way of convincing you that building the palace of your dreams was not practically possible.”

 

 Sent By : http://goo.gl/IpBSAH
The story
A long time ago, king Krishna Deva Raya had a very wise minister in his court by the name of Tenali Raman. Once, the kingdom faced a major problem of rats. Rats had multiplied to a very large number and were creating a lot of destruction. They were nibbling through important papers, clothes, grains in food stores, etc. There were not many cats in the kingdom to catch all the rats. So, the king asked all the houses in the kingdom to keep one cat each. But cats feed on milk and not every house owned a cow to get the milk. So, the king also gave cows to every house. The people were happy and brought up the cows and the cats. They used to give a lot of milk to their cats.

But Tenali Raman was a lazy fellow and he was also very fond of drinking milk. He wanted to keep the milk from the cow for himself. So, he thought of a clever trick. He boiled the milk and poured it in a pan. Then, he put this pan in front of the cat. As soon as the cat touched the boiling hot milk with its tongue, its tongue got burned and it ran away at once. Tenali repeated the same thing the next day and again the day after that. After a few days like that, the cat refused to touch the milk that was offered to it for fear of getting its mouth burned. In this way, Tenali got to drink all the milk himself.

One day, the king ordered for all the cats to be brought before him for inspection. While everyone else’s cats were fat and healthy, Tenali’s cat looked thin and weak. The king was very angry with Tenali for not taking proper care of the cat. But Tenali pleaded, “Your Majesty, I cannot help it. My cat does not drink any milk at all.” The king said, “Nonsense, I will put you in prison for telling a lie.” Tenali requested the king to give him a chance to prove it and the king agreed.

So, Tenali brought his cat and the pan of milk in front of the king. He offered milk to the cat. But on seeing the pan of milk, the cat ran away, frightened. The king was surprised at this but he let Tenali go. Tenali lived happily, enjoying lots of milk by himself.

 

 Sent By : http://goo.gl/IpBSAH
